documentation/64498-project-life-cycle (#19157)
opf/openproject: docs/user-guide/project-overview/README.md

Open the project overview by navigating to **Overview** in the project menu on the left.

![Project overview page for a specific project in OpenProject](openproject_user_guide_project_overview.png)

## Project life cycle 

**Project life cycle** is an overview of project phases and phase gates, which offers a clear view of where each project stands within its defined timeline. 

> Project phases are managed in system administration and can be enabled or disabled under project settings for every project. 

Reviewer: Noteworthy IMO is that this allows to have different life cycles defined in the system where a project can then choose the most appropriate one. E.g. there might be an elaborate life cycle for complex projects and a simplified one for the others.

I so far haven't found it mentioned that project phases can be (and by default are) copied when copying a project (including templates). By that, project templates with different characteristics can be prepared and then instantiated depending on the need.

> Project phases are managed in system administration and can be enabled or disabled under project settings for every project. 

Author: ```suggestion
Project phases are managed in the system administration and can be enabled or disabled individually in the settings of each project. This allows for defining multiple life cycle variants within the system. For example, a detailed life cycle for complex projects and a simplified one for smaller or less structured projects.
```

On each project's **overview page**, you can find a section called **project life cycle**. This section appears in the side panel above the **project attributes** and shows the dates configured for each phase and gate of the current project. 

> [!TIP]
>
> If all phases and gates are disabled for a project, the project lifecycle section is hidden from the overview page.

![Project life cycle phases displayed on a project overview page in OpenProject](openproject_user_guide_project_overview_project_life_cycle.png)

### Schedule project phases

> Project phases must follow specific rules for setting and adjusting dates. The system automatically schedules phases based on the input provided, enforcing correct order, preventing overlaps, and preserving durations where possible.

Reviewer: It also prevents gaps. Subsequent phases will always start on the next working day after the predecessor's finish date.

> Project phases must follow specific rules for setting and adjusting dates. The system automatically schedules phases based on the input provided, enforcing correct order, preventing overlaps, and preserving durations where possible.

Author: ```suggestion
Project phases must follow specific rules for setting and adjusting dates. The system automatically schedules phases based on the input provided, enforcing correct order, preventing overlaps and gaps, and preserving durations where possible. Each subsequent phase starts on the next working day after the previous one ends."
```

> For each of the active project phases, you can defined a date range. To set or manage the date range click on that date range (it will be empty initially)and set the date with a OpenProject date picker. 

Reviewer 2: There is a missing space at "...initially)and"

> For each of the active project phases, you can defined a date range. To set or manage the date range click on that date range (it will be empty initially)and set the date with a OpenProject date picker. 

Author: ```suggestion
For each of the active project phases, you can defined a date range. To set or manage the date range click on that date range (it will be empty initially) and set the date with a OpenProject date picker. 
```

> For each of the active project phases, you can define a date range. To set or manage the date range click on that date range (it will be empty initially) and set the date with a OpenProject date picker. 

Reviewer: I think this would have to be "an OpenProject date picker"

> For each of the active project phases, you can define a date range. To set or manage the date range click on that date range (it will be empty initially) and set the date with a OpenProject date picker. 

Author: ```suggestion
For each of the active project phases, you can define a date range. To set or manage the date range click on that date range (it will be empty initially) and set the date with an OpenProject date picker. 
```

> For each of the active project phases, you can defined a date range. To set or manage the date range click on that date range (it will be empty initially) and set the date with a OpenProject date picker. 

Author: ```suggestion
For each of the active project phases, you can define a date range. To set or manage the date range click on that date range (it will be empty initially) and set the date with a OpenProject date picker. 
```

> [!NOTE]
>

> > Keep in mind that you require certain permissions to to edit the date range for project phases.

Reviewer: The permission in question is the "Edit project phases" permission. Seeing the life cycle is also guarded by a permission ("View project phases"). Without that permission, the phases will not be displayed to the user on the overview, the project list, filtering for it in work packages will not work, the phase will not be displayed on the work package view.

> > Keep in mind that you require certain permissions to to edit the date range for project phases.

Author: ```suggestion
> Keep in mind that editing the date range of project phases requires the *Edit project phases* permission. 

> Viewing the project life cycle is also permission-controlled: without the *View project phases* permission, phases won't appear in the project overview, project list, work package filters, or on the work package view itself.
```

![Edit date range for project phase on a project overview page in OpenProject](openproject_user_guide_project_overview_project_life_cycle_edit_date_range.png)

Use the guidelines below to understand how phase and gate scheduling behaves.

#### Basic rules

> - A phase must have both a start and end date, or neither—partial entries are not allowed.

Reviewer 2: That is not 100% true, I think. The user might be able to add only one of the two dates, but that will not be considered as defining the phase dates. To see the dates on the overview, the users need to input both dates, but saving a finish date only for later is currently also possible. Correct @ulferts?

Reviewer: Correct @marcalcobe. One of the dates can also be entered but that is then not considered to be a fully defined phase. We expect phases to only have such a state for a very short time and not be the norm. But it might be that for some time, a user might only know when a phase is about to start.

> - A phase must have both a start and end date, or neither—partial entries are not allowed.

Author: ```suggestion
- A phase is only considered fully defined when both a start and finish date are set. While it's possible to enter just one of the two (typically as a temporary state), such phases will not appear with dates in the overview. This allows flexibility when, for example, only the start date is known initially, but full definition is expected to follow shortly.
```

- The start date must be on or before the end date.
- The minimum duration of a phase is one day (start and end date can be the same).
- There is no maximum duration for a phase.
- Phases cannot overlap with one another.

> - Gaps between phases and gates are allowed.

Reviewer 2: Don't think that is the current implementation, can you confirm @ulferts? The Start date of any preceding phase will also take the finish date of the previous one therefore having gaps is not allowed.

Reviewer: Correct again, @marcalcobe . Gaps are not allowed.

> - Gaps between phases and gates are allowed.

Author: ```suggestion
- Gaps between phases and gates are not allowed.
```

> #### Gates and phase sequence constraints

Reviewer 2: I think we should use the term "Phase gates" as PM2 defines. At least in the headers of sections.

> #### Gates and phase sequence constraints

Author: ```suggestion
#### Phase gates and constraints
```

> - **Gates** must:

Author: ```suggestion
Gates are always positioned at the start or end of a phase and follow the phase's dates.
```

> - **Gates** can:

Reviewer 2: This is not an optional "can" it should be "Phase gates must:"

> - **Gates** can:

Author: ```suggestion
- **Gates** must:
```

>     - Share the same date with another gate of the same phase.

Author: ```suggestion
    - You cannot set gate dates independently — adjusting the phase's start or finish date will automatically move the corresponding gate.
```

>     - Share the same date as the **start or end** of a phase.

Author: ```suggestion
    - Share the same date with another gate of the same phase.
```

>     - **Not** be placed **within** the date range of a phase.

Author: ```suggestion
    - Phase fates are never placed inside the phase duration but always at its borders.
```

>     - **Not** share the same date with another gate.

Reviewer: This is written in a fashion not directly clear to me. 

The user can activate gates on the start or at the end of a phase. The date the gate is at can therefore not be chosen independently of the phase. Rather, by setting the start or the finish date of the phase, a gate is rescheduled as well. As such, they will always be at the border of the interval and they will never overlap with another gate.

>     - **Not** share the same date with another gate.

Author: ```suggestion
    - Phase gates never overlap or share the same date with other gates.
```

>     - **Not** share the same date with another gate.

Reviewer 2: I would say "Share the same date with another gate of the same phase".

>   - **Phases and gates must follow the predefined order** configured in system administration (e.g., *Initiating* must come before *Closing*).

Reviewer: Here, I would try to be more precise and this would by my proposal:

- **Phases and gates will follow the order predefined in the system administration** (e.g., *Initiating* must come before *Closing*). Dates for a subsequent phase cannot be before those of any preceding phase. The automatic scheduling enforces this as well.

>   - **Phases and gates must follow the predefined order** configured in system administration (e.g., *Initiating* must come before *Closing*).

Author: ```suggestion
  - **Phases and phase gates will follow the order predefined in the system administration** (e.g., *Initiating* must come before *Closing*). Dates for a subsequent phase cannot be before those of any preceding phase. The automatic scheduling enforces this as well.
```

>   - **Child projects** are **not restricted** by the lifecycle dates of their parent project.

Reviewer: I'd also add that phases not activated in a project will not be considered at all with regards to constraints. That is mentioned further down but I think it sensible to add it here as well.

>   - **Child projects** are **not restricted** by the lifecycle dates of their parent project.

Author: ```suggestion

 - Project phases not activated in a project will not be considered at all with regards to constraints. 
  - **Child projects** are **not restricted** by the lifecycle dates of their parent project.
```

#### Automatic scheduling behavior

- **Scheduling occurs automatically** and without user confirmation when possible.
- When the **finish date of a phase changes**:

>   - The **next active phase’s start date** is updated to the **next working day**.

Reviewer: Important to note is that this can mean that the subsequent phase is moved into the future or into the past depending on the direction the preceding phase's finish date moved.

>   - The **next active phase’s start date** is updated to the **next working day**.

Author: ```suggestion
  - The **next active phase’s start date** is updated to the **next working day**. This can mean that the subsequent phase is moved into the future or into the past depending on the direction the preceding phase's finish date moved.
```

>   - If the next phase has a **duration**, its **finish date is adjusted** to preserve it (based on working days).

Reviewer: I'd elaborate that a phase will get a duration whenever start and finish date are set.

>   - If the next phase has a **duration**, its **finish date is adjusted** to preserve it (based on working days).

Author: ```suggestion
  - If the next phase has a **duration** (a phase will get a duration whenever start and finish date are set), its **finish date is adjusted** to preserve it (based on working days).
```

>   - If the next phase has a **finish date but no prior start date**, the finish date is only adjusted if it falls **before** the new start date.

Reviewer: This is currently not true. Actually, nothing happens in this case and the user will have to reselect the dates (with the start date being already filled (as the next working day after the preceding phases's finish date).

>   - If the next phase has a **finish date but no prior start date**, the finish date is only adjusted if it falls **before** the new start date.

Author: ```suggestion
```

  - **Scheduling continues down the chain** of phases until no further adjustments are needed.

#### Missing or partial dates

- Scheduling begins **as soon as enough dates are defined**, even if not all phases have dates.
- If a user **removes the finish date** of a phase, the **start date of the successor** phase is preserved to maintain its duration.

#### Constraints and errors

> - Scheduling only proceeds **forward in time**.

Reviewer: This might be misunderstood. If a phase is shortened, subsequent phases are moved backwards in time.

> - Scheduling only proceeds **forward in time**.

Author: ```suggestion
- If a phase is shortened, subsequent phases are moved backwards in time.
```

- Setting a finish date that is **before the start date** results in an **error**. The start date is **not auto-adjusted**, and duration is not preserved in this case.

#### Inactive phases

- **Inactive phases are ignored** during scheduling.

> - The next **active** phase is treated as the logical successor.

Reviewer: I would clarify that "next" is again defined by the order in the administration.

> - The next **active** phase is treated as the logical successor.

Author: ```suggestion
- The next **active** phase (based on the order defined in the administration) is treated as the logical successor.
```

- When a phase is **deactivated**, its dates remain unchanged, and the scheduling continues from the following active phase.

#### Activating or deactivating phases

- When a phase is **activated**:

>     - If it had a **duration**, the system may adjust the finish date to maintain it.

Reviewer: It will adjust both dates if necessary (if there would be a gap or overlap otherwise) if it is completely defined.

>     - If it had a **duration**, the system may adjust the finish date to maintain it.

Author: ```suggestion
    - If the phase has a defined duration (both start and finish dates set), the system may adjust the dates to prevent gaps or overlaps.
```

    - This can trigger rescheduling of succeeding phases.

>     - If it had **no duration**, a start date may be set, but the finish date may remain unset. This may unset the next phase’s start date.

Reviewer: I fail to understand these sentences. Dates will only be reset on complete phases.

>     - If it had **no duration**, a start date may be set, but the finish date may remain unset. This may unset the next phase’s start date.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - When a phase is **deactivated**, its dates are preserved, and scheduling skips it going forward.

Reviewer 2: I would add "...going forward with the next stage." at the end of the sentence.

> - When a phase is **deactivated**, its dates are preserved, and scheduling skips it going forward.

Author: ```suggestion
- When a phase is **deactivated**, its dates are preserved, and scheduling skips it going forward with the next stage.
```

> - When a phase is **deactivated**, its dates are preserved, and scheduling skips it going forward with the next stage.

Reviewer: The permission to active/deactivate is "Select project phases"

> - When a phase is **deactivated**, its dates are preserved, and scheduling skips it going forward with the next stage.

Author: ```suggestion
- When a phase is **deactivated**:
       - Its dates are preserved.
       - Scheduling will skip this phase and move directly to the next active phase.
> [!NOTE]
> Activating or deactivating phases requires the *Select project phases* permission.
```

#### Other scheduling triggers
 - **Changes to non-working days** (added or removed) will reschedule all affected phases across all projects to **preserve duration**.
 - **Modifications in global phase configuration** (adding, deleting, reordering) do **not** immediately reschedule existing projects.
 - However, the **first user interaction** with a lifecycle after such changes will trigger a rescheduling to preserve phase durations.

> ## Project attributes

Reviewer: Changes to a project's life cycle are mentioned in the project activity 

<img width="1251" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cd55d378-d564-484f-af27-2ee78a92acbd" />

This is so far not mentioned here.
